README.md, before:

# Fisher-Informed Differential Privacy (Fisher DP-SGD)

This repository implements curvature-aware differential privacy for CIFAR-10 training using Fisher information matrices. The key innovation is using Fisher-informed noise that adapts to the loss surface geometry, providing better privacy-utility tradeoffs compared to vanilla DP-SGD.

## 🎯 **Three-Method Research Platform**

This repository provides a comprehensive comparison of three major DP-SGD enhancement methods:

1. **Fisher DP-SGD**: Curvature-aware noise adaptation using Fisher information
2. **DP-SAT**: Differentially Private Sharpness-Aware Training ([Park et al., ICML 2023](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/park23g.html))
3. **Vanilla DP-SGD**: Standard baseline ([Abadi et al., CCS 2016](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2976749.2978318))

## 🚀 **Quick Start**

### Install Dependencies
```bash
pip install torch torchvision numpy scipy scikit-learn tqdm opacus
```

### Run Single Experiments
```bash
# Compare all three methods (default: positively correlated noise)
uv run main.py --mps --compare-others --target-epsilon 10.0 --run-mia

# Try negatively correlated noise strategy
uv run main.py --mps --compare-others --negatively_correlated_noise --target-epsilon 10.0

# Run ablation study with Fisher + DP-SAT synergy
uv run ablation.py --mps --target-epsilon 10.0 --k 64 --lambda-flatness 0.01 --run-mia
```

## 🎯 **Method Overview**

### Fisher DP-SGD: Curvature-Aware Noise
**Problem**: Vanilla DP-SGD uses isotropic noise in anisotropic loss landscapes.
**Solution**: Shape noise according to Fisher information F = E[∇log p(y|x) ∇log p(y|x)ᵀ]

**Noise Scaling Strategies**:
- **Positively Correlated**: `noise ∝ √λ` - More noise in high curvature directions
- **Negatively Correlated** (default): `noise ∝ 1/√λ` - Less noise in high curvature directions

### DP-SAT: Flatter Minima
**Problem**: Sharp loss landscapes cause DP-SGD to fail.
**Solution**: Guide optimization toward flatter minima for better noise robustness.

### Vanilla DP-SGD: Standard Baseline
Standard per-sample gradient clipping + isotropic Gaussian noise.

## 🔒 **Strict Differential Privacy Guarantee**

This repository implements **Option 1: Frozen Backbone + DP Finetuning** to provide formal $(\epsilon, \delta)$-DP guarantees for the entire released model.

### Architecture

**Strict DP Setup**:
1. **Baseline Training (Public Data)**: The baseline model is pre-trained on **public data only**. This ensures the initial weights for frozen layers contain no private information.
2. **DP Finetuning (Private Data)**: Only selected layers (specified via `--dp-layer` or `--dp-param-count`) are trained with DP-SGD on the **private dataset**. All other layers are **frozen** (`requires_grad=False`).
3. **Formal Guarantee**: The entire released model is $(\epsilon, \delta)$-DP with respect to the private dataset, because:
   - Frozen layers depend only on public data (no privacy leakage).
   - DP-trained layers use formal DP-SGD mechanisms (Fisher DP-SGD or Vanilla DP-SGD).

### Data Splitting (Simulation Setup)

**For CIFAR-10 ablation studies**, we simulate a "large public corpus + small private dataset" scenario:

- **Public data (45k)**: Large subset of CIFAR-10 train → baseline pretraining
- **Private data (5k)**: Small subset of CIFAR-10 train → DP finetuning  
  - Controlled by `--dataset-size` (default: 5,000)
- **Evaluation data (10k)**: Full CIFAR-10 test → final accuracy measurement

**Note**: This treats most of the training set as "public" for simulation purposes. In real applications, public data would come from a genuinely public source (e.g., ImageNet pretraining, web-scraped images, etc.).

### Why This Approach?

Computing Fisher information matrices for all parameters is computationally expensive. By:
- Training the baseline on large public data (strong pretrain),
- Freezing most layers (no DP cost),
- Applying Fisher DP-SGD only to selected layers (manageable cost),

we achieve **strict DP** while maintaining computational feasibility and strong baseline performance.

### Implementation Details

- **Baseline**: Trained on `pub_loader` (45k public samples) in `ablation.py`.
- **Freezing**: All parameters NOT in `--dp-layer`/`--dp-param-count` are automatically frozen during DP training.
- **Verification**: The code logs `🔒 Strict DP: Frozen N parameter groups` to confirm the setup.

**Example**:
```bash
# Default: 45k public, 5k private (from 50k trainset)
uv run ablation.py --dp-layer "conv1,conv2" --target-epsilon 2.0

# Custom split: 40k public, 10k private
uv run ablation.py --dataset-size 10000 --dp-layer "conv1,conv2" --target-epsilon 2.0
```

This ensures the final model has a formal $(\epsilon, \delta)$-DP guarantee w.r.t. the private training dataset.

## 📊 **Experimental Results (negatively related noise)**

We use the following configuration:
```bash
uv run ablation.py --mps --k 2048 --epochs 100 --dataset-size 50000 --target-epsilon 2.0 --delta 1e-5 --dp-layer conv1,conv2 --clip-radius 2.0 --run-mia --users 100 --calibration-k 200 --trust-tau 0.0005 --reg 10
```

### 100 Users
```
⚖️  Privacy vs Accuracy Tradeoff:
   Model                          Accuracy  Privacy (1-AUC)
   ────────────────────────────── ─────────  ──────────────
   Vanilla DP-SGD                  48.3%     0.509
   Vanilla DP-SGD + DP-SAT         50.2%     0.500
   Fisher DP + Normal              65.7%     0.498
   Fisher DP + DP-SAT              63.4%     0.493
   Fisher DP + Normal + Calib      66.8%     0.491
   Fisher DP + DP-SAT + Calib      64.2%     0.506
```

**Key Discovery**: Fisher DP-SGD shows significant improvements over vanilla DP-SGD, with Fisher DP + Normal + Calibration achieving the best accuracy of 66.8% while maintaining strong privacy protection (1-AUC = 0.491).

### Sample-Level DP

Using sample-level configuration:
```bash
uv run ablation.py --mps --k 2048 --epochs 100 --dataset-size 50000 --target-epsilon 5.0 --delta 1e-5 --dp-layer conv1,conv2 --clip-radius 1.0 --run-mia --sample-level --calibration-k 200 --trust-tau 0.0005 --reg 10
```

```
⚖️  Privacy vs Accuracy Tradeoff:
   Model                          Accuracy  Privacy (1-AUC)
   ────────────────────────────── ─────────  ──────────────
   Vanilla DP-SGD                  59.8%     0.473
   Vanilla DP-SGD + DP-SAT         59.4%     0.477
   Fisher DP + Normal              64.0%     0.464
   Fisher DP + DP-SAT              65.7%     0.534
   Fisher DP + Normal + Calib      64.6%     0.461
   Fisher DP + DP-SAT + Calib      66.4%     0.536
```

**Sample-Level Discovery**: Fisher DP + DP-SAT + Calibration achieves the highest accuracy of 66.4% in sample-level DP, demonstrating the effectiveness of combining all three techniques.

## 🔧 **Configuration Options**

### Core Parameters
```bash
# Privacy levels
--target-epsilon 1.0    # High privacy
--target-epsilon 10.0   # Moderate privacy

# Dataset sizes (Simulation Setup - Option B)
--dataset-size 5000     # Size of PRIVATE dataset (from CIFAR-10 trainset, default: 5,000)
                        # Public dataset = remaining trainset samples (default: 45,000)
                        # Evaluation dataset = full testset (10,000)
                        # Example: --dataset-size 10000 → 40k public, 10k private, 10k eval

# Model architecture
--model-type cnn              # Simple CNN (default)
--model-type resnet18         # ResNet-18
--model-type efficientnet_b0  # EfficientNet-B0

# Fisher strategies (fixed default)
--negatively_correlated_noise   # Less noise in high curvature (default; positive option removed)

# DP modes
--sample-level          # Traditional DP
--users 10             # User-level DP

# Fisher subspace
--k 64                 # Smaller subspace (faster)
--k 256                # Larger subspace (more accurate)
```

### Parameter Relationship: `--k` vs `--dp-layer`
- **`--dp-layer` (Scope)**: Selects which parameters (total count $P$) are trained with DP. **All other parameters are frozen** (trained on public data only), ensuring strict DP.
- **`--k` (Fidelity)**: Sets the rank of the Fisher approximation within that scope.
  - **Constraint**: $k \le P$ (automatically clamped if larger).
  - **Tradeoff**: Higher $k$ captures more curvature information but requires more memory/compute. Lower $k$ is faster but uses a coarser approximation.

### Advanced Features
```bash
# Adaptive clipping (disabled by default)
--adaptive-clip --quantile 0.95

# DP-SAT flatness
--lambda-flatness 0.01

# MIA evaluation
--run-mia --mia-size 1000

# Target specific layers (Strict DP: other layers are frozen)
--dp-layer "conv1,conv2"               # CNN: matches prefixes conv1, conv2, ...
--dp-layer "resnet.conv1"              # ResNet-18 stem only (smallest)
--dp-layer "resnet.conv1,resnet.bn1"   # ResNet-18 stem + BN
--dp-layer "resnet.conv1,resnet.layer1"  # add first block; expand with layer2, layer3, layer4 as needed

# OR: Use parameter budget (mutually exclusive with --dp-layer)
--dp-param-count 20000                 # Train up to 20,000 parameters with DP (smart selection)
```

**Note**: When using `--dp-layer`, the specified layers are trained with DP on private data, while all other layers are **frozen** (pre-trained on public data). This ensures strict $(\epsilon, \delta)$-DP for the entire model.

When using `--dp-param-count N`, the code smartly selects **complete parameters** (no partial layers) that maximize parameter usage within budget `N`. It selects parameters in model order, skipping any that would exceed the budget. This ensures:
- Only complete parameters are selected (no partial layer training)
- Maximum utilization of the parameter budget
- Predictable behavior across different architectures

**Example**: With budget 20,000 and layers [conv1: 896, conv2: 18,496, conv3: 73,728]:
- Selects: conv1 + conv2 = 19,392 parameters (96.96% efficiency)
- Skips: conv3 (would exceed budget)

**`--dp-layer` vs `--dp-param-count`**:
- These options are **mutually exclusive**
- `--dp-layer`: Select parameters by layer names (more semantic, substring matching)
- `--dp-param-count`: Select parameters by budget (architecture-agnostic, greedy knapsack)

**Layer naming (prefix match)**:
- **CNN**: `conv1`, `conv2`, `conv3`, `fc1`, `fc2`
- **ResNet-18**: `resnet.conv1`, `resnet.bn1`, `resnet.layer1`, `resnet.layer2`, `resnet.layer3`, `resnet.layer4`, `resnet.fc`
- **EfficientNet-B0**: `efficientnet.features.0`, `efficientnet.features.1`, …, `efficientnet.features.8`, `efficientnet.classifier`

## 🔬 **Research Applications**

### Compare Noise Strategies
```bash
# (positively correlated noise option removed)
uv run main.py --negatively_correlated_noise --target-epsilon 8.0 --compare-others --run-mia
```

### Privacy-Utility Tradeoffs
```bash
for eps in 1.0 5.0 10.0 20.0; do
    uv run main.py --target-epsilon $eps --compare-others --run-mia
done
```

## 🏗️ **Core Files**

- **`main.py`**: Single experiment comparison
- **`ablation.py`**: Fisher + DP-SAT synergy study
- **`fisher_dp_sgd.py`**: Fisher-informed DP-SGD implementation
- **`dp_sat.py`**: DP-SAT implementation
- **`mia.py`**: Membership inference attack evaluation

## 📚 **References**

- **DP-SAT**: Park, J., et al. (2023). Differentially Private Sharpness-Aware Training. *ICML 2023*. [Link](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/park23g.html)
- **Vanilla DP-SGD**: Abadi, M., et al. (2016). Deep learning with differential privacy. *CCS 2016*. [Link](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2976749.2978318)

## ⚖️ **License**

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

Split pub sets into pretraining and calibration

README.md, after:

# Fisher-Informed Differential Privacy (Fisher DP-SGD)

This repository implements curvature-aware differential privacy for CIFAR-10 training using Fisher information matrices. The key innovation is using Fisher-informed noise that adapts to the loss surface geometry, providing better privacy-utility tradeoffs compared to vanilla DP-SGD.

## 🎯 **Three-Method Research Platform**

This repository provides a comprehensive comparison of three major DP-SGD enhancement methods:

1. **Fisher DP-SGD**: Curvature-aware noise adaptation using Fisher information
2. **DP-SAT**: Differentially Private Sharpness-Aware Training ([Park et al., ICML 2023](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/park23g.html))
3. **Vanilla DP-SGD**: Standard baseline ([Abadi et al., CCS 2016](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2976749.2978318))

## 🚀 **Quick Start**

### Install Dependencies
```bash
pip install torch torchvision numpy scipy scikit-learn tqdm opacus
```

### Run Single Experiments
```bash
# Compare all three methods (default: positively correlated noise)
uv run main.py --mps --compare-others --target-epsilon 10.0 --run-mia

# Try negatively correlated noise strategy
uv run main.py --mps --compare-others --negatively_correlated_noise --target-epsilon 10.0

# Run ablation study with Fisher + DP-SAT synergy
uv run ablation.py --mps --target-epsilon 10.0 --k 64 --lambda-flatness 0.01 --run-mia
```

## 🎯 **Method Overview**

### Fisher DP-SGD: Curvature-Aware Noise
**Problem**: Vanilla DP-SGD uses isotropic noise in anisotropic loss landscapes.
**Solution**: Shape noise according to Fisher information F = E[∇log p(y|x) ∇log p(y|x)ᵀ]

**Noise Scaling Strategies**:
- **Positively Correlated**: `noise ∝ √λ` - More noise in high curvature directions
- **Negatively Correlated** (default): `noise ∝ 1/√λ` - Less noise in high curvature directions

### DP-SAT: Flatter Minima
**Problem**: Sharp loss landscapes cause DP-SGD to fail.
**Solution**: Guide optimization toward flatter minima for better noise robustness.

### Vanilla DP-SGD: Standard Baseline
Standard per-sample gradient clipping + isotropic Gaussian noise.

## 🔒 **Strict Differential Privacy Guarantee**

This repository implements **Option 1: Frozen Backbone + DP Finetuning** to provide formal $(\epsilon, \delta)$-DP guarantees for the entire released model.

### Architecture

**Strict DP Setup**:
1. **Baseline Training (Public Data)**: The baseline model is pre-trained on **public data only**. This ensures the initial weights for frozen layers contain no private information.
2. **DP Finetuning (Private Data)**: Only selected layers (specified via `--dp-layer` or `--dp-param-count`) are trained with DP-SGD on the **private dataset**. All other layers are **frozen** (`requires_grad=False`).
3. **Formal Guarantee**: The entire released model is $(\epsilon, \delta)$-DP with respect to the private dataset, because:
   - Frozen layers depend only on public data (no privacy leakage).
   - DP-trained layers use formal DP-SGD mechanisms (Fisher DP-SGD or Vanilla DP-SGD).

### Data Splitting (Simulation Setup)

**For CIFAR-10 ablation studies**, we simulate a "large public corpus + small private dataset" scenario:

- **Public pretraining data (40k)**: Large subset of CIFAR-10 train → baseline pretraining
- **Public calibration data (5k)**: Small subset of CIFAR-10 train → influence function calibration
- **Private data (5k)**: Small subset of CIFAR-10 train → DP finetuning  
  - Controlled by `--dataset-size` (default: 5,000)
- **Evaluation data (10k)**: Full CIFAR-10 test → final accuracy measurement

**Optimization**: The public data is split into pretraining (40k) and calibration (5k) subsets. This significantly speeds up influence function computation, as we only need to compute influences on 5k samples instead of 45k, while still maintaining strong baseline performance from 40k pretraining samples.

**Note**: This treats most of the training set as "public" for simulation purposes. In real applications, public data would come from a genuinely public source (e.g., ImageNet pretraining, web-scraped images, etc.).

### Why This Approach?

Computing Fisher information matrices for all parameters is computationally expensive. By:
- Training the baseline on large public data (strong pretrain),
- Freezing most layers (no DP cost),
- Applying Fisher DP-SGD only to selected layers (manageable cost),

we achieve **strict DP** while maintaining computational feasibility and strong baseline performance.

### Implementation Details

- **Baseline**: Trained on `pub_loader` (45k public samples) in `ablation.py`.
- **Freezing**: All parameters NOT in `--dp-layer`/`--dp-param-count` are automatically frozen during DP training.
- **Verification**: The code logs `🔒 Strict DP: Frozen N parameter groups` to confirm the setup.

**Example**:
```bash
# Default: 45k public, 5k private (from 50k trainset)
uv run ablation.py --dp-layer "conv1,conv2" --target-epsilon 2.0

# Custom split: 40k public, 10k private
uv run ablation.py --dataset-size 10000 --dp-layer "conv1,conv2" --target-epsilon 2.0
```

This ensures the final model has a formal $(\epsilon, \delta)$-DP guarantee w.r.t. the private training dataset.

## 📊 **Experimental Results (negatively related noise)**

We use the following configuration:
```bash
uv run ablation.py --mps --k 2048 --epochs 100 --dataset-size 50000 --target-epsilon 2.0 --delta 1e-5 --dp-layer conv1,conv2 --clip-radius 2.0 --run-mia --users 100 --calibration-k 200 --trust-tau 0.0005 --reg 10
```

### 100 Users
```
⚖️  Privacy vs Accuracy Tradeoff:
   Model                          Accuracy  Privacy (1-AUC)
   ────────────────────────────── ─────────  ──────────────
   Vanilla DP-SGD                  48.3%     0.509
   Vanilla DP-SGD + DP-SAT         50.2%     0.500
   Fisher DP + Normal              65.7%     0.498
   Fisher DP + DP-SAT              63.4%     0.493
   Fisher DP + Normal + Calib      66.8%     0.491
   Fisher DP + DP-SAT + Calib      64.2%     0.506
```

**Key Discovery**: Fisher DP-SGD shows significant improvements over vanilla DP-SGD, with Fisher DP + Normal + Calibration achieving the best accuracy of 66.8% while maintaining strong privacy protection (1-AUC = 0.491).

### Sample-Level DP

Using sample-level configuration:
```bash
uv run ablation.py --mps --k 2048 --epochs 100 --dataset-size 50000 --target-epsilon 5.0 --delta 1e-5 --dp-layer conv1,conv2 --clip-radius 1.0 --run-mia --sample-level --calibration-k 200 --trust-tau 0.0005 --reg 10
```

```
⚖️  Privacy vs Accuracy Tradeoff:
   Model                          Accuracy  Privacy (1-AUC)
   ────────────────────────────── ─────────  ──────────────
   Vanilla DP-SGD                  59.8%     0.473
   Vanilla DP-SGD + DP-SAT         59.4%     0.477
   Fisher DP + Normal              64.0%     0.464
   Fisher DP + DP-SAT              65.7%     0.534
   Fisher DP + Normal + Calib      64.6%     0.461
   Fisher DP + DP-SAT + Calib      66.4%     0.536
```

**Sample-Level Discovery**: Fisher DP + DP-SAT + Calibration achieves the highest accuracy of 66.4% in sample-level DP, demonstrating the effectiveness of combining all three techniques.

## 🔧 **Configuration Options**

### Core Parameters
```bash
# Privacy levels
--target-epsilon 1.0    # High privacy
--target-epsilon 10.0   # Moderate privacy

# Dataset sizes (Simulation Setup - Option B)
--dataset-size 5000     # Size of PRIVATE dataset (from CIFAR-10 trainset, default: 5,000)
                        # Public pretrain = 50k - dataset_size - 5k (default: 40,000)
                        # Public calibration = fixed 5k (for efficient influence computation)
                        # Evaluation = full testset (10,000)
                        # Example: --dataset-size 10000 → 35k pretrain, 5k calib, 10k private, 10k eval

# Model architecture
--model-type cnn              # Simple CNN (default)
--model-type resnet18         # ResNet-18
--model-type efficientnet_b0  # EfficientNet-B0

# Fisher strategies (fixed default)
--negatively_correlated_noise   # Less noise in high curvature (default; positive option removed)

# DP modes
--sample-level          # Traditional DP
--users 10             # User-level DP

# Fisher subspace
--k 64                 # Smaller subspace (faster)
--k 256                # Larger subspace (more accurate)
```

### Parameter Relationship: `--k` vs `--dp-layer`
- **`--dp-layer` (Scope)**: Selects which parameters (total count $P$) are trained with DP. **All other parameters are frozen** (trained on public data only), ensuring strict DP.
- **`--k` (Fidelity)**: Sets the rank of the Fisher approximation within that scope.
  - **Constraint**: $k \le P$ (automatically clamped if larger).
  - **Tradeoff**: Higher $k$ captures more curvature information but requires more memory/compute. Lower $k$ is faster but uses a coarser approximation.

### Advanced Features
```bash
# Adaptive clipping (disabled by default)
--adaptive-clip --quantile 0.95

# DP-SAT flatness
--lambda-flatness 0.01

# MIA evaluation
--run-mia --mia-size 1000

# Target specific layers (Strict DP: other layers are frozen)
--dp-layer "conv1,conv2"               # CNN: matches prefixes conv1, conv2, ...
--dp-layer "resnet.conv1"              # ResNet-18 stem only (smallest)
--dp-layer "resnet.conv1,resnet.bn1"   # ResNet-18 stem + BN
--dp-layer "resnet.conv1,resnet.layer1"  # add first block; expand with layer2, layer3, layer4 as needed

# OR: Use parameter budget (mutually exclusive with --dp-layer)
--dp-param-count 20000                 # Train up to 20,000 parameters with DP (smart selection)
```

**Note**: When using `--dp-layer`, the specified layers are trained with DP on private data, while all other layers are **frozen** (pre-trained on public data). This ensures strict $(\epsilon, \delta)$-DP for the entire model.

When using `--dp-param-count N`, the code smartly selects **complete parameters** (no partial layers) that maximize parameter usage within budget `N`. It selects parameters in model order, skipping any that would exceed the budget. This ensures:
- Only complete parameters are selected (no partial layer training)
- Maximum utilization of the parameter budget
- Predictable behavior across different architectures

**Example**: With budget 20,000 and layers [conv1: 896, conv2: 18,496, conv3: 73,728]:
- Selects: conv1 + conv2 = 19,392 parameters (96.96% efficiency)
- Skips: conv3 (would exceed budget)

**`--dp-layer` vs `--dp-param-count`**:
- These options are **mutually exclusive**
- `--dp-layer`: Select parameters by layer names (more semantic, substring matching)
- `--dp-param-count`: Select parameters by budget (architecture-agnostic, greedy knapsack)

**Layer naming (prefix match)**:
- **CNN**: `conv1`, `conv2`, `conv3`, `fc1`, `fc2`
- **ResNet-18**: `resnet.conv1`, `resnet.bn1`, `resnet.layer1`, `resnet.layer2`, `resnet.layer3`, `resnet.layer4`, `resnet.fc`
- **EfficientNet-B0**: `efficientnet.features.0`, `efficientnet.features.1`, …, `efficientnet.features.8`, `efficientnet.classifier`

## 🔬 **Research Applications**

### Compare Noise Strategies
```bash
# (positively correlated noise option removed)
uv run main.py --negatively_correlated_noise --target-epsilon 8.0 --compare-others --run-mia
```

### Privacy-Utility Tradeoffs
```bash
for eps in 1.0 5.0 10.0 20.0; do
    uv run main.py --target-epsilon $eps --compare-others --run-mia
done
```

## 🏗️ **Core Files**

- **`main.py`**: Single experiment comparison
- **`ablation.py`**: Fisher + DP-SAT synergy study
- **`fisher_dp_sgd.py`**: Fisher-informed DP-SGD implementation
- **`dp_sat.py`**: DP-SAT implementation
- **`mia.py`**: Membership inference attack evaluation

## 📚 **References**

- **DP-SAT**: Park, J., et al. (2023). Differentially Private Sharpness-Aware Training. *ICML 2023*. [Link](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/park23g.html)
- **Vanilla DP-SGD**: Abadi, M., et al. (2016). Deep learning with differential privacy. *CCS 2016*. [Link](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2976749.2978318)

## ⚖️ **License**

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.
